[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The healing benefits of
psychedelic plant medicines are
well-documented.
But what about the rest
of the plant kingdom?
And can they heal not just our
bodies but our entire planet?
In 2019, the Imperial
College of London
released a study that
found participants
who use psychedelics
reported an enhanced feeling
of connectedness,
especially with nature.
Our planet is in the
midst of a climate crisis.
As temperatures rise
and ice caps melt,
massive wildfires and
extreme weather events
have become the norm,
not the exception.
Getting people to
simply care about this
remains one of the
biggest hurdles.
So, could the solution
involve plant medicines?
>> All you have to do is turn on
the TV to see what's going on.
I mean, it's happening, and
it's not happening slowly.
it's happening rather rapidly.
You'd think that
would be a wake-up .
Call without
psychedelics there's
plenty of reason to be alarmed.
But maybe the psychedelics
provide an additional boost
to help focus people's
attention on it.
>> Meanwhile, our
societies are in turmoil.
And our mental and
physical well-being
is being threatened by
our own advancements
in agriculture and technology.
>> I think we're in
the situation that
we're in because we've lost
our sense of belonging on this
planet.
We feel so disconnected
from ourselves,
from our experiences, from
each other, from the Earth,
and we've forgotten how to
connect to that sacredness
within us.
So we no longer know how
to come in a good way
and how to be in right relations
with all the living beings
around us.
>> Could plants be the teachers
we need to guide us into living
healthier, more spiritual lives?
And if so, can humans
and plants come together
to save the world just
in the nick of time?
Mushrooms, fungi,
perhaps no other organism
illustrates our
planet's potential
for interconnectedness.
>> Most of us are familiar with
the fruiting body of mushrooms.
But, yet, underground,
there's this whole network.
>> These aren't just roots.
This complex web
absorbs nutrients
and can even break down
pollutants, plastic,
and even radioactive waste.
They can even discern
between plants or minerals
they come into contact with
and make decisions to keep
the ecosystem in balance.
>> We're learning that sometimes
the network could be miles
across and that the plants are
actually communicating with
each other.
>> It's believed that the
so-called mycelium blanket was
perhaps the largest connected
organism on the planet,
a vast interconnected
underground network of fungi.
But as mankind built roads
and tilled the soil for crops,
underground connections
in this network
were severed,
effectively isolating
large and varied ecosystems
from one another.
What does this suggest
about the potential
for plants' intelligence?
>> The way that we define
the word "intelligence"
is usually in the realm
of human experience.
But we can look at other
organisms on this planet
as having a kind of
intelligence that
is just different from
the way that we operate.
Plants have a kind
of intelligence
that surpasses a
lot of the things
that we can do as humans.
>> In December of 2020, "The
New York Times Magazine"
published a story about how
trees can form mycorrhizas,
underground partnerships with
fungi to communicate with each
other.
These networks can span
entire forests and even
link trees of separate species.
>> I think plants are not just
intelligent but brilliant.
I think they may be far more
intelligent than humans,
in fact.
To understand that there
is a threat, to understand
exactly what they need to
create to deal with that,
to maybe attract another
predator to get rid
of this predator or to
impair the fertility
of this particular
predator that's
right there at that
time, that tells me
that plants really
understand how
to interact with their
environment in very
rapid and intelligent and
careful and brilliant ways.
>> I'm fond of saying that these
psychedelic plants are sort
of Gaian ambassadors.
They are one of the mechanisms
that the biosphere is
bringing forward to try to,
again, wake up our species.
They are catalysts, and
there's co-evolutionary aspects
to this.
We have been co-evolving with
these plants for millennia,
really.
And now, all of a sudden,
something like ayahuasca
has escaped from the Amazon and
it's spread across the world.
Or something like
cannabis, which
before was kind of
suppressed and vilified,
now it's everywhere.
So maybe the biosphere--
Gaia, if you will--
recognizes that
it's in great peril.
So this may be one of
the ways that it responds
by sort of bringing these
plants forward, bringing them
into our attention.
And this is not unlike
the way any ecosystem will
respond to a threat.
>> Trees are conscious.
They understand things.
And they even respond
to different stimuli
depending on threat
and stuff like that.
And they warn each other.
So there's a consciousness
in this plant
that, when you smoke
them, when you eat them,
you get a download of
that consciousness.
And even this is just a glimpse.
You get a glimpse of the
ancient history of this Earth.
You feel the ancestral lineage
when you touch these plants.
It's like a way of
reconnecting to our ancestors,
to Mother Earth, in a way
that most people don't really
understand.
>> It's important to remember
that we all share this common
ancestry.
The neurotransmitters
in our brain
that drive consciousness--
the so-called monoamines
like serotonin, epinephrine,
norepinephrine, and now
DMT, which we know is
a neurotransmitter--
these were all
widespread in nature
and had signal transduction
functions and ecosystems
before there were any complex
mammalian nervous systems.
>> Many believe that another way
we can reconnect is to develop
an understanding of spirits
residing within a plant.
>> The word "deva" has been used
in different ways in different
cultures over time.
But here in reference to
the idea of a plant entity,
we can see that deva is like
the spirit behind the scenes
of a certain species of plant.
So there might be a deva for
mint or a deva for sunflowers
or a deva for the
cannabis family.
And each of the
plants that grow are
like cells of this larger
being or field of intelligence.
And we can see this in
even insect species,
like ants or bees.
They have an underlying deva
that they are all a part of,
and they operate
like a group mind.
And they collectively
work together
for the symbiosis of Gaia.
>> Is it possible, as
our ancestors believed,
to connect with the spirit of a
plant family and to gain access
to its healing powers?
>> Certain plant devas
are specifically operating
in the realm of affecting
human consciousness.
And since they exist in a kind
of unity consciousness state,
we, when we ingest
these plants, we
can entrain to the frequency of
this deva or the consciousness
underlying this plant.
And this is an amazing
experience for the human
because we can see what
it's like to experience
a kind of group mind, not
only with the symbiotic nature
of our planet Gaia but
also with other humans.
And this experience
can help humans
to connect with each
other in a way that
is almost like a telepathic
grid of unity consciousness.
And this alone could
help us to solve
many of the problems
we face as a species.
>> These devas are believed
to be present in plants of all
kinds.
Shamans and medicine workers use
psychedelics for deep healing.
But the devas, found in
many other types of plants,
can be used to heal,
enhance, and energize.
Gotu Kola is used for
energy and mental alertness.
Ginkgo biloba helps with memory.
Betel nuts are chewed for
digestion and mental acuity.
These are considered adaptogens.
>> Adaptogens are plants
that can help us acclimate
to different situations.
So, for example, an adaptogen
might help us calm down
when we're feeling stressed.
But it could also help us to
sleep when we have insomnia.
But it could also
give us more energy.
>> Adaptogens like astragalus,
ashwagandha, ginseng, turmeric,
and even small dosages of
cannabis can aid the body
and mind in adapting to stress,
something that isn't in short
supply these days.
>> A lot of the adaptogens grow
under very adverse conditions.
I think of rhodiola.
This is a plant that grows
in a very northern climate
and survives all this adversity.
The plants that grow
under adverse conditions,
like in the Arctic
Circle in Siberia,
they figured out the key to
survival and adaptability.
And by imbibing them, it
can help us acclimate.
We should also be looking at
the dandelion, because here's
the plant that we disdain.
And yet, nobody planted it.
Nobody watered it.
They mow it down, and it
still comes back just a little
shorter the next season.
I feel that one thing we
really need to partner with
is some of these plants that
have adapted to adversity.
And by imbibing that,
it's going to help
us have those Jedi
superhero skills
so that we can
adapt and acclimate.
Be like the dandelion.
>> Our ancestors developed
methods and theories around
the use of herbs.
One such practice, developed
by the ancient Greeks,
was referred to as the
doctrine of signatures.
>> The doctrine of signatures
has been used by humans since
the beginning of time to
determine the effect of a plant
or a food on the human body in
healing or in medicinal value.
For example, a carrot if you
cut it, it looks like an eye.
And the carotenoids in the
carrots are good for the eyes.
Walnuts look like the brain,
and we know now that, yes,
they are good for the brain.
Horsetail looks like hair.
It's got silica in it, and
it is good for the hair.
So this is the meaning of
the doctrine of signatures.
>> The continued
growth of the internet,
even in remote regions,
has encouraged more sharing
of herbs and plants
from all over the world.
With more accessibility to
botanical cultures than before,
some in the scientific
community have
started to study
the synergy that can
occur between different plants.
>> Plant medicines have been
used by millions of people
for thousands of years.
And to research that and look
at something that can actually
help nourish us
as well as heal us
might be a wiser choice
than something that
just suppresses the symptoms.
>> One doesn't always need a
full psychedelic experience
to access some of the healing
and connecting properties
of plant medicines.
>> Microdosing allows people to
have contact with this medicine
in small amounts and to gain
some of the neuroplasticity
benefits.
They can have experiences where
they feel more creative, more
relaxed, more flexible.
And it can be profound for
some people who are very stuck.
But they don't have to do
this more dramatic experience.
>> Microdosing works differently
depending on the person,
the frequency, the
amount that people take,
even how many times they
take it during the same day.
One cannot microdose
with everything.
The two most useful microdosing
are with mushrooms and LSD.
Some people do it with a bit
of iboga or a bit of peyote.
Microdosing is very valuable
and needs to be studied further.
>> Macrodosing is the classic
trip experience where you have
the full psychedelic
experience for several hours.
The benefit of a macrodose is
you have full ego dissolution.
You don't have any defenses.
You are going to have to dive
into this immersive experience
and have a period
of full surrender.
Surrender is medicine.
That is a powerful
medicine that can touch you
in ways that nothing else can.
>> And surrendering to nature
may be the best way to fight
back against the forces
trying to destroy it.
Our fraught relationship
with technology
was in some ways foretold.
Beginning in 1891,
Rudolf Steiner
warned of electromagnetic
radiation,
insisting the spiritual
aspirin would need twice
as much fortitude to
accomplish the same amount
of spiritual work.
>> We're being forced to
adapt to the technology,
but technology is
not entirely bad.
It can serve humanity,
and it has done so.
Like Rudolf Steiner
and many others
have promoted that we need
to create spiritual science.
We need to create
technology that does not
endanger the
existence of humanity,
to create more chaos and
addictions and abuse,
creating reality for people,
so social engineering,
and to realize the consequences
and to create technology
in the right way to
further ourselves
to maybe, at some point, we can
bypass this form of technology
that can endanger us and
realize the old technologies
that the ancients use,
which is to figure out what
else Earth can serve us with.
>> Steiner couldn't possibly
have imagined the amount
of EMFs we now produce.
So how can a spiritual
aspirins of today
live harmoniously in a world
of increasing EMF production?
>> EMF and technology are
wreaking havoc on the human
consciousness.
Why?
Because we're energy machines.
There's a lot of
electromagnetics
at work within us and
the brain and the heart
and the rest of the body.
So when we're
subjected to Wi-Fi,
when we're close to every plug
in the wall that's 60 Hertz,
it's interfering in
human consciousness,
in the living
machine that we are,
and we're having to adapt
to it very quickly--
to cell towers.
And now there's a
great concern with 5G.
Maybe the fact that we're
interested in profit
is getting us to overlook what
the long-term exposure and what
the consequences are.
>> Can the plant kingdom
have some kind of assistance
or defense?
Many herbalists,
researchers, and healers
believe the answer is yes.
One doesn't need to
travel to the Amazon
to acquire these
beneficial plants.
Many can be found in
your pantry, supermarket,
or even your backyard.
And research suggests that
ginger, turmeric, and citrus
can mitigate the effects
of radiation exposure.
And the mere introduction
of plant material
into the water we consume
can have profound effects.
Konstantin Korotkov's
Bio-Well technology
measures photon emissions
and shows readings
before and after
drinking water infused
with plants, like tea, essential
oils, or flower essences.
>> Konstantin Korotkov used
his Bio-Well device to measure
the biophotons emitted from
the human energy field before,
during, and after the
ingestion of ayahuasca.
And it was amazing to note
that, during the experience
of the plant medicine, there
was almost no visible field
around the body.
And after the experience,
there were still
large holes in it that took
a while to reconstitute.
And this showed us how these
plant medicines open us up
to view the higher realms
and have expanded states
of consciousness.
But it also indicated that,
after the experience, it
it's good to leave some time to
let the auric or the biofield
regenerate itself.
And there are things
that we can do,
such as visualization
or prayer or a salt bath
or time in nature, to help the
process of the reconstitution
of the field.
>> The major problem in the
world now is alienation.
We are disconnected
from our own bodies.
from each other.
We are disconnected from nature.
So returning spirituality into
the industrial civilization,
I think it's the most
effective, most powerful,
most hopeful way of dealing with
the crisis, the global crisis
that we have lost.
We have lost effective
spirituality.
We have organized
religions, but they
became very fundamentalist.
And it's amazing that the
industrial civilization managed
to just completely suppress
it, including things
like killing shamans
in different countries,
stopping these
different religions--
in many instances, replacing
really relevant native
spirituality.
>> The ancient keepers
of plant wisdom--
such as witches,
shamans, and healers--
are nearly gone.
But institutions are
slowly rediscovering
what our ancestors
intuitively understood.
Balance with nature
is not only better
than endless economic growth
but essential to our survival.
>> Wherever you live, if you
live in an apartment or you
live in a house,
you're on autopilot,
intuitively connected to your
whole home and how it works.
How do you open the
garage or whatever
it is, that might be a mystery
to somebody that's never lived
in that kind of circumstance.
The Indigenous cultures,
they live in nature.
And so that's their influence.
Nature is this
incredible teacher.
So when you immerse
yourself in that,
you learn more about that.
You learn more about yourself.
You understand more
about what it is
to be alive here on this Earth.
And so when you don't have
that, what a disconnect
that is from the cosmos.
It's massive.
>> Depression, anxiety, trauma--
the pace and pressures
of the material world
can lead many down a path that
leaves them feeling isolated.
For those that have
lost their way,
is it possible that
psychedelic plant medicines
can reintroduce the notion
of being one with nature?
>> We're right on the cusp
of ecological devastation
and a biological extermination.
And if we don't open up
to this consciousness
to get back to
Gaian consciousness,
we're going to die.
>> I think we are out of balance
with the masculine and feminine
energy that overly masculine
is overly intellectual,
overly materialistic,
overly objective.
And so there's a big
turn right now, a shift,
to recognize the feminine.
Plant medicines can
help foster our access
to the feminine, our
reverence for the feminine.
>> The clock is ticking.
Is there any hope
that the world can
come into harmony with nature
the way our ancestors once
lived?
>> Anything that can help us to
have more humanitarian aspects,
caring for others, caring about
the survival of our children,
about the planet, rather than
only what's going on right now,
is really imperative.
>> Understanding the power
of Gaia may be the key.
>> Sacred psychoactive
plants can serve humanity.
They have always been here
provided, by our dear planet
Gaia, to help us awaken.
And now they are resurging to
share their medicine with us
at this time.
>> So how we go forward
may truly be up to us.
Are we at a quantum
timeline choice point,
as many ancient
cultures believed?
>> There are many cultures
that have pointed to this time
in history as a kind of timeline
bifurcation as a possibility
of what we might experience.
The Aztecs, the Hopi prophecies,
modern Damanhur Federation,
and many others say that, at
certain junctures in history,
there can be a bifurcation
of the timeline, which
means a quantum
splitting of realities.
And there might be
some reality that
exist where AI takes over
the planet and biology
as we know it fades out and
another reality where humans
go to the next level
of their evolution,
of symbiosis with the Gaian
super mind and with each other.
We have to realize
that we have more power
than we realize to create the
reality we want to live in.
>> It's important to think
about this matter of self
empowerment.
The power is within us.
The plant medicines just help
us to discover that power.
>> We need to
understand who we are,
to bring spirituality into
the shamanic experience,
to not empower
things outside of us,
which we are trained
to look for our savior,
for extraterrestrial,
for profit,
for an avatar who's going
to come and save us.
We are the ones that
we can save ourself,
but we need to
upgrade this, and we
need to use what we know
of psychedelics to really
understand that
words create reality.
>> Perhaps only a radical
expansion of consciousness can
reveal the solution to an
urgent and growing threat.
>> I think the most important
thing that we need to do is
to recognize that we need to
function in partnership with
nature, we're not
the owners of nature,
and that nature is
really running the show.
We need to accept that and
behave in such a way that
supports the flourishing
of life on Earth,
supports the evolution,
the co-evolution.
>> The first and most important
thing is to remember that we
are in relationship
with plant world.
They are our family.
They're our kin.
They're our friends.
They're our teachers.
We want to approach the plants
as though they are respected
and beloved members of our
family with wisdom to impart.
They're our elders.
That means we want to come
in a place of gratitude,
of appreciation, of
awe, and of wonder.
We want to come with offerings,
whether it's to the soil,
to the plants, with
songs, with celebration.
And then we just need
to learn to listen.
>> What I believe
Gaia truly means--
it's not just the
feminine spirit.
It's a type of
intelligence that is
connected to the ultimate
feminine archetype, which
is nature.
>> We cannot do anything to
nature that doesn't happen
to ourselves.
If you work with people
with holotropic states,
they develop a sense
of spirituality
that's universal, that's
all encompassing, that's
ecumenical.
Those are all
characteristics that
would help our
survival as a species
if it would happen on
a large enough scale.
Now, whether it can happen
on a large enough scale
and whether we have enough
time, that's a question.
I mean, I have seen
the transformation
in hundreds of
people, literally.
>> The global initiative to
restore our relationship with
Gaia, with nature,
with ancient knowledge,
and with plant medicine
is not a regression.
It is a move
forward to reconnect
with the technology
that has been with us
since the very beginning.
It could be that the
use of psychedelics
is an ancient tool to
access the consciousness
of the future, the
consciousness of Mother Earth.
[MUSIC PLAYING]